[ Wolves howling ]
♪♪
Narrator: Previously,
on "Mountain Men"...
Marty: I really need more meat
to get through the rest
of the year.
Narrator: As the battle for
winter rages on...
Marty: Goat hunting,
the challenge is just seeing
if you can get
to where they're at.
Narrator:...the men face
dwindling supplies...
Marty: I didn't get
an elk or a deer,
so I got to get some
food on the table.
Narrator:...and are pushed
to the edge...
Morgan: Got a regularly
scheduled flight come in
and bring us
some needed supplies.
Narrator:...to survive nature's
most powerful forces.
Ah, [bleep].
That's not good.
If the plane were to land
on something like this,
it'll break through.
♪♪
In the great Alaska Range...
Oh.
...at an overnight camp 6 miles
from his homestead,
Morgan Beasley
is up early to prepare
for a critical
late-winter supply drop of fuel.
Morgan: Gasoline
is just essential
to us being productive.
You know, if we don't get
the fuel before this spring,
it'll really set back
our construction projects
and our clearing projects.
Narrator:
A local bush pilot is scheduled
to arrive within the hour
and touch down on the frozen
lake to make the delivery,
but an unexpected early melt
is compromising the runway.
When it's frozen, and it's
all icy and smooth,
you know, a plane on skis
can come in there and land,
but it's not ground you want
to try to do in the summertime.
It's way easier
when it's frozen.
Spring is coming early,
and I'm a little nervous
about conditions.
Yeah, out here in the open,
the snow is really melted off.
It's not good for
today's mission of trying
to get to the lake
and see if the ice is good
enough to land a plane on it.
Narrator: The surface of
the lake must have at least
a solid foot of ice
if it's going to support
the weight of a 1-ton plane.
So far, the landing strip Morgan
marked yesterday is holding,
but the temperature
is already 45 degrees.
♪♪
Morgan: Just making sure
that things are
how I left it yesterday
afternoon.
Things are changing fast
right now.
The way the overflow
is happening,
the way the melt-off
it's just early this year.
Narrator:
Any signs of cracking,
and Morgan will have to
call off the drop.
Morgan: You know, hopefully,
the flight happens,
but this kind of rendezvous
is always a little uncertain.
That's just how it is out here.
Well, so far, so good.
It looks pretty solid still.
Overflow
hasn't made it out this far,
but if he doesn't
make it in today,
I don't think we'll be able
to use this lake again.
♪♪
[ Helicopter blades whirring
distantly ]
I think I hear an airplane,
but actually,
it sounds like a helicopter.
Coming in low.
Oh, I think I know that chopper.
Narrator: Bush planes are
the heavy haulers of the north
because they can fly faster
and carry more cargo,
but helicopters
often weigh less,
making them a safer bet
for landing on thin ice.
Morgan: The helicopter has
a pretty low altitude,
so I was trying to get
a good look at the ice.
I was just waving
and giving the thumbs up,
saying that the ice is fine.
It's plenty thick.
-Hello, sir.
-I'm good.
Morgan: Sure enough,
the conditions around here
are not ideal,
and they sent a helicopter
instead of an airplane.
Oh, thank you.
Things just don't
always go as planned.
I'm just really lucky
that I could even, you know,
make this drop happen.
Packages, got some
rootstock in there.
Narrator: The supplies include
15 gallons of fuel...
All right....and three boxes of rootstock
for starting a new crop
of fruit trees in the spring.
Will do.
Thanks, again, for making it.
-Yeah. Good to see you.
-Yeah.
Got the fuel, means
we can keep working.
I just got to get it all home.
Narrator: Altogether, the cargo
weighs 150 pounds,
an easy haul over
slick snowpack,
but that's fading fast.
Morgan: That's amazing how much
snow has melted in a day.
There's a bunch
of open ground here
that wasn't open
on the way down.
Oh.
And dragging this sled
over this bare ground
is not very easy.
Eventually, I'll make it home.
Aw.
But it's slow going, no matter
which way you cut it.
♪♪
Narrator:
On Alaska's Kodiak Island,
dawn breaks on day 2
of Marty Meierotto's
daring trek into one of
the wildest places on Earth.
He's traveled 400 miles
from home
for the rare opportunity
to hunt here.
The island is known for
its rugged landscape
and exotic wildlife
and is his best chance
to snag the meat
he needs to last
the rest of the winter.
Marty: I need to get going
and get out of here into
the goat country.
Narrator: At this time of year,
the daylight window
is just 6 short hours,
and Marty intends to make
every minute count.
His return flight
leaves tomorrow.
Marty: The earlier start I get,
the better.
That'll give me enough time,
hopefully, to get up there,
snoop around, maybe find a goat,
and get him down off the
mountain before it gets dark.
Narrator:
His plan is to target the hardy
population of mountain goats
that live on the island's
high-altitude cliffs.
A single full-size goat
can provide 80 pounds of meat,
enough to feed his family
for a month.
I'm going to put on
my crampons right away
because there's ice everywhere.
They work really good.
Even in rocks, they help some.
All right.
When you goat hunt, you get up
in the nastiest, uncomfortable,
just nasty, steep.
That's where they live, and if
you don't want to do that,
then you might as well
not try goat hunting.
Narrator: Yesterday,
Marty scouted
a small goat herd on
the mountainside.
To track them,
he faces a punishing
2,000-foot vertical climb
through a slick and icy canyon.
Marty: When you come up
a canyon like this,
you know, there's a lot of ice
and, you know, a lot
of fast-moving water,
and you can have bad ice.
You just got to be careful
and pick your way.
If I can test it
with my foot, I will,
or I'll smack it hard
with the ice pick.
Just test every time
you put your foot down.
Narrator: The water below
is a frigid 22 degrees.
One misstep here
could be deadly.
Some of these holes
are real deep.
If you get yourself in a pickle,
you can get really submerged,
and that's one 4 or 5 feet
deep, maybe deeper.
All right.
Piece of cake, huh?
Narrator: Ahead is the most
challenging obstacle of all,
a 60-degree incline
straight up the mountain.
Marty: Man, just to stay on
the side of the mountain,
I have to use
the ice ax to hang on.
♪♪
All right.
I guess onward and upward.
♪♪
Narrator: Across the continent,
in the Blue Ridge Mountains,
it's been months
since a violent storm
blew through
Turtle Island,
but Eustace Conway
and Preston Roberts
are still digging out
from the aftermath.
Eustace: We've lost a lot of
money from that tornado damage,
so one thing that
we do have cash income
is just basically odd jobs.
Narrator:
Today, their work is for hire,
lending their skills
to local farmer Dean Johnson
who's facing
an urgent problem --
a 50-foot poplar tree
that's rotten to the core
and threatening to come
down at any moment.
Well, this rotten tree is
so weak, when a big wind comes,
it'll just blow right over.
That thing could fall any day.
You can tell by that scar.
That's a sick tree, right there.
It's got a little solid
around the outside,
but that scar comes
all the way down to there.
Rot weakens the tree.
It just takes away
the inner skeleton,
and pretty soon, there's
nothing left to hold it up.
That old rotten tree wants
to fall on that shelter.
It's leaning right towards it.
I believe we'll try to fell it
right down in that open
right there.
Narrator: Safely felling a tree
this large
without damaging
the small structure nearby
requires rigging a guide rope
to steer it to the ground.
Eustace: We're going to tie
the rope as high as we can.
Preston is going
to pull on it
so we can control
the fall of the tree.
Narrator: But to rig the rope,
they need to climb to 25 feet.
Preston: We're just going to
make us a ladder real quick.
Cut a couple little
poplar trees down.
Split up some rungs...
...and nail them together
and lean it up in that tree.
Looks like a ladder.
That's what you called
homemade homemade.
We need to get that rope
as high as we can, Preston.
-Oh, yeah.
-Twist it that way, just a hair.
That's probably it, right there.
Well, I'll try to tie it
as high as I can up there.
-Yup.
-And the further up we get,
the more power
we'll have to pull it.
♪♪
I think we're going to do
the best we can on this thing.
Dean: Okay.
That's all I can ask.
Narrator: The guide rope
attaches to the truck,
which will provide the power
to pull the thousand-pound giant
in the right direction.
Eustace: That's good.
Narrator:
But timing is everything.
Preston:
I've got to be ready to go,
and I've got to be cued into
what Eustace and Dean are doing,
which is very difficult to do.
I can pull on
that tree too soon,
and I can really
mess everything up.
I can pull too hard, and I can
pull the tree down onto me,
so it needs to be just
the perfect timing with it all.
Narrator: Angled cuts
in the tree trunk
steer the direction of the fall.
The wedges push it
to the tipping point.
Dean: Okay.
Hold on.
All right.
It's going.
Eustace:
I never let my guard down
when I'm cutting a rotten tree
because that rot down
near the base of the tree
makes it so you can't control
where the tree
is going to go.
And we're going to try
really hard
to keep it off
of that shelter.
That's our main objective.
Whoa.
Okay.
It's going.
Going. Go! Go!
O0 C1Narrator:
In North Carolina...
[ Chainsaw rumbling ]
Whoo!
...Eustace and Preston's
ingenuity lands
a rotten tree
in the clear.
We did it.
Wa-hey!
All told, I think the falling
job went pretty well.
Preston did a good job.
Everything worked.
Man, I really appreciate y'all
cutting this tree down for me.
-Oh, you bet, Dean.
-Saved my building right there.
Eustace: Yeah.
You know, we cut this log open.
It's just incredibly rotten.
It's like there's
just a small core
of a living tree
around the outside.
The inside is totally
rotted out.
Dean will have
some good firewood.
Yeah, the culture up here
in the mountains,
if you're neighbors,
you help them, they help you.
It's just nice to get
Dean's work done over here,
but I have a feeling the list
is still getting larger
over at my place.
I better head back
over the mountain.
♪♪
Narrator:
In the Ozark Mountains,
the change from winter
to spring brings a new
kind of danger to the wild.
It's been 2 months
since the last rain,
plunging the entire area
into drought conditions,
and for Jason Hawk,
the timing couldn't be worse.
Jason: It's time to get
hammering, make some more cash.
Narrator: He's pushing hard to
build up his war chest.
Last month, after months
of searching for a piece of land
to call home,
the perfect plot slipped
through his fingers,
lost to a higher bidder.
Jason: Every dollar that we save
is another dollar towards land.
I don't want to be
in another situation
where something comes up
and I get outbid.
There's a fire ban in place,
so I've got to figure out
how to continue
my craft around it.
Narrator: The charcoal-powered
forge Jason uses
to make blades
throws off sparks
that can easily
ignite a wildfire.
If he wants to continue making
money in drought conditions,
he must improvise a way
to contain the blaze.
The best, I figured, so far, is
I rustled up an old weed burner,
some cans and
a little party keg.
Narrator: The plan is
to contain the fire
inside a metal cauldron...
So that's going to be
my main body.
...and use the weed burner
as a heat source.
The propane torch produces
a small flame that doesn't spark
and can be housed
to concentrate the heat
inside the metal keg.
Jason: And now, I've got to get
the sides secured on where,
actually, the torch head
is going to go.
I don't have a setup
to weld this fine,
so I got to figure out
how to mechanically attach
these two pieces together.
So by nipping it,
if I bend them opposite,
I should be able
to put that down in,
which means half the tabs
will be on the outside,
and half the tabs
will be on the inside,
so it won't push in,
won't pull out.
♪♪
I think that'll work.
Narrator: The aluminum keg
is lined with
a heat-resistant ceramic fiber
to increase its durability.
Jason: Got to make sure
this is lined.
I mean, this isn't very thick,
and you're running at
or over 1,500 degrees.
It's hot.
Everything is set.
Now it's time to get this thing
all on a solid base.
And when you're working
like this, it's time
to start cobbling
some things together
and see if this
is even going to work.
Narrator: The improvised forge
must withstand temperatures
of 1,500 degrees.
Any lower, and Jason will be
out of work indefinitely.
Jason: Every day I'm not out
there hammering,
I'm losing money.
This needs to pan out.
Narrator: High in the rocky
cliffs of Kodiak Island,
Marty is on a perilous mission
to bag a mountain goat
before nightfall.
After a punishing 2,000-foot
ascent up an icy canyon,
he's finally closing in
on their territory.
♪♪
There's a goat track
right there.
You can always tell
a goat track by...
It's blocky.
It's kind of squared off.
It's not pointed
like a deer track.
So there's goats in here.
♪♪
Narrator: Mountain goats have
exceptional eyesight
and see objects for more
than a mile away,
so Marty must keep
a low profile.
♪♪
He needs to be within
200 yards of his target
to get a clean shot.
Marty: When you're out
in high country,
the distance is super deceptive.
I never take a shot
I don't think I can make.
There's no use throwing
Hail Mary shots out there.
When you shoot and miss,
they disappear.
You might not ever
see them again.
♪♪
If I go up the canyon,
they're going to see me
because they're looking
straight down on me.
What I'm counting on
is the goats
thinking they're in such
jagged, nasty country
that they feel safe enough to
let me approach within rifleshot
before they decide
to get out of there.
That's really my only option.
♪♪
Ah.
They slipped out of there.
I'm just going to
continue up the canyon
and hopefully see the goats.
Narrator: With just 3 hours
of daylight left,
Marty has to land
a shot soon or risk
a blind descent down
the mountain after dark.
Marty: I'm going to head right
at them, hope for the best
because that's my only option.
I'm just going to try to get
underneath them
and hopefully get
a shot up at them.
♪♪
Narrator: In Southwest Montana,
the last weeks of winter mark
the beginning of calving season,
the period when
most cattle are born.
In a good year, the size
of the herd can double
in a matter of weeks,
a jackpot for the ranchers
of cattle country.
Rich: Calving season is the most
important time of the year
because that's where
your money is at.
Narrator: But if the herd
is left unattended,
predators can move in
and destroy a cattleman's
livelihood overnight.
Rich: Calves are real easy prey,
so it's just real dangerous
right now.
I haven't lost one cow
this year,
and I'm not going to start now.
Narrator: Calving season is also
the busiest time of year
for Rich Lewis,
who makes his living
protecting the Ruby Valley
from predators
like lions and wolves.
Today, he's answering
an urgent call from a rancher
who's missing 12 head of cattle,
$30,000 worth of beef.
Well, something ran the cows
through the fence here,
busted these wires apart.
Just trying to get fence
fixed back here
and figure out
what went down.
It's kind of a critical deal
right now,
when they get
scurried off like that.
That's about
the easiest prey to get.
That ought to work.
The tension on those cattle
are going to be way up
because they've been spooked.
I've got to try to find them
and get them back,
so just going to start
looking for tracks and signs
and to see which way they went.
Sniper, down.
You stay now.
I don't want any tracks here.
Hard to see in this dirt.
Narrator:
The temperate weather makes
tracking far more difficult.
Prints are easier to spot
and decode in snow than in dirt.
Rich: Usually, we have snow
this time of year,
but it's really warm, so it's
going to be a lot harder.
I mean, you really got to take
your time and look real slow.
Oh, right here.
Oh, that's...
Lion track, right here,
definitely a female.
Walked right along here.
Here's another one, right here.
Yeah, went right
down this trail.
Lions hunt at night, so I need
to get these cattle back
on this ranch before nighttime.
Once night comes, that lion
is going to be a lot
more comfortable in the dark,
could kill one of them heifers,
or she might have
one killed already.
I don't know.
Looks like they
gone through here.
It's going to be real hard
to find them.
They could be scattered out.
So I'm just going to hit
the river bottom here
and start working
through the willows.
When you spook a heifer,
they're like lighting.
They're gone.
♪♪
Narrator:
In the great Alaska Range,
Morgan is moving
150 pounds of much-needed fuel
and supplies back
to the homestead.
Morgan: It's a hell of a lot
slower than the way to the lake.
Ugh.
Narrator: But he's racing
against an early thaw
that's transformed
the trail overnight.
He usually navigates the hauling
sled smoothly over the snowpack,
but the melt creates
patches of open ground
that make the trek
an uphill battle.
Morgan: I'm really kind of
feeling sapped of strength
after not having slept
very well, and, you know,
I'm just going to lean
in this harness here,
get this sled
pulled up the hill.
Mm!
Aw, yeah.
Starting to level off here.
Oh, yeah, getting better up
here, on top of the hill.
Shouldn't be too much further,
get down onto the creek,
and that's a little
easier going.
Ugh.
Narrator: The final 2-mile
stretch of the journey
is flatland, skirting the banks
of Big Creek.
Morgan: Whoa.
It looks like
a big section of this creek
has dropped out overnight.
Narrator: But the thaw has
melted away the ice bridges
he relies on
for a safe crossing.
Let's see if I can
get around here. This...
That doesn't look very good.
The trail in front
of me is gone.
Ice must have dropped out
at some time
yesterday or this morning.
Damn it.
I'm going to head around
this brush and try to find a way
to get back on the trail
and get across the creek.
That bridge isn't
any good there,
but the next one up there
looks like it's not bad.
Well, I see pretty quickly
that it's not very good.
I don't want to risk
breaking through,
and I know all the snow
bridges are particularly soft,
and the big pieces of ice
that are supporting
them are -- are breaking.
Oh!
♪♪
O0 C1♪♪
Shoot! Aw, damn it!
♪♪
Tub's going.
Ugh.
Damn it. Damn it.
Damn it.
Aw, [bleep].
It went under!
Ah.
Aw, thank God.
Aw.
I think I lost my old hat,
but I got the gasoline, though.
Get this thing out of here.
[ Grunts ]
Looks like it's all there.
♪♪
Well, I'm almost home.
The sled, put it back together
and try to stay
a little farther
away from the creek.
Oh.
[Bleep].
Aw, no [bleep].
Nice.
[ Laughs ]
Little wet, but I guess,
sometimes, you get lucky.
Narrator: Crisis avoided,
Morgan pushes upstream
to a safer crossing.
Morgan: Yeah, what do you think?
Is this bridge okay?
Looks okay, but this late
in the afternoon,
these shelves can
collapse any time.
[ Exhales sharply ]
Okay.
That's good.
Come on, Rufus.
We can cut through here.
I'm back down into our
home creek bottom here.
I'm making a little better time.
It's flat.
There's less brush,
and it's easy pulling.
But we're getting home now.
Oh, okay.
Just a couple more bends to go.
♪♪
I got the fuel home,
so that's the main part.
I'm definitely hungry
and ready to lay down
on a comfortable bed.
Now that we've got some fuel
for the upcoming season,
we're going to be able to keep
clearing and milling lumber
and running the generator
if we need to.
All right.
Ugh. That feels good.
It's just 15 gallons of gas,
but it represents a lot of work
being done here on the ground.
You know, you feel secure,
and you feel a little rich.
♪♪
Narrator: In the Ozark
Mountains, drought conditions
have Jason's blacksmithing
business on hold
unless his improvised
forge proves safe enough
to work around the ban
on open flames.
Jason: I just want to be
hammering, making some money,
not wasting my time.
I need this thing to work out.
Narrator: He's constructed
a makeshift cauldron
to contain a small propane flame
and is testing to see
if the design can generate
enough heat to shape steel.
Jason: Man, that looks like
it's going to work.
That's plenty hot.
That's working great.
Narrator: The temporary forge
is too small
to turn out big blades.
For now, Jason will use it
to fulfill a smaller order.
Jason: Couple of brothers,
they want me
to do a set of fire irons
for them, one each.
It's basically just
three sections of steel,
twisted, decorated up.
They connect together.
You hang your pots
and pans off of them.
It's just for
an old-timey campsite.
Narrator:
Known for their durability,
fire irons were
first popularized
during the cattle
drives of the 1800s.
Today, a hand-forged replica
can fetch good money
for an expert craftsman.
Jason: With this set itself,
oh, make about 200 bucks each.
So it's about 400 bucks.
That all adds up.
So all I'm doing right now
is starting to establish
a bit of a point,
not super sharp
but just so it has
a little area to divot into.
♪♪
Mm, it's looking pretty close.
You got nice
little points there.
Now that I've got all the points
done, the next step is,
I must square
this area off a bit
and give it a twist for
decoration more than anything.
Every time you're
working on a piece,
you're always fighting cooling.
So when you get a piece out of
the fire, you got to move.
♪♪
[ Grunting ]
Not bad.
This kind of a forge works
on a Venturi burner system,
which means it's pulling
the oxygen
out of the air as it goes.
As the wind picks up,
it's cutting the air supply.
When I get a cross breeze,
it drops the temperature
of the forge,
and it slows down
the whole process.
It doesn't take much of a breeze
to drop the heat,
which just makes my job
that much harder.
See? That thing has gotten
all squirrelly.
I'm not hot enough.
I've got to straighten it out,
but I can't mar that surface.
Narrator: A wooden club will
hammer out the steel.
It's strong enough
to shape the metal
but soft enough
to leave no marks.
So I'm able to straighten
out that twist,
and none of the little
edges got marred.
Last one.
Oh, come on.
Come on. Come on.
[ Grunts ]
Ah.
♪♪
Ah!
[Bleep]
Narrator: At Jason's improvised
forge in the Ozark Mountains,
scalding hot metal debris
just hit too close for comfort.
Jason: [ Exhales sharply ]
Ugh.
Damn it.
Ah.
Little piece of that hot scale
didn't get me in the eye
but just right below it.
Whenever you're forging, there's
always scale dropping off.
That critter came up,
and it caught in
the folds of my eyelid,
and they're hot, really hot.
Glad it wasn't the eyes,
but it's still not fun.
Back at it.
Narrator: The fire irons are
nearly complete
with just a few final
bends to make.
So one of the next things
I'm going to have to do here
is actually take this tail end
and start curling for the eye.
And mark...
that out.
♪♪
That'll do.
Narrator: The completed
fire irons
form a standard spit formation.
All right.
There we go, two sets.
Narrator: A set of S-hooks
will hold pots
and cookware over
campfire coals.
Jason: The forge, I'm running
kind of primitive,
but we got the job done.
Improvising is
becoming a lost art.
My dad, you know, the thing
I really learned from him is,
if you can understand
the base concept
of what you're
attempting to do,
you can do anything
you want to do.
All right.
That'll work.
The day finished out great.
Got what we needed
to get done, done.
I got the fire irons finished.
River had a good day at school.
So you had fun?
-Yes.
-Yeah?
What'd you do all day?
Here. Come sit down.
I'll show you what I did.
Close your eyes.
All right.
Look.
Ooh.
So, these are for cooking
over the fire.
-So...
-Ooh!
...you can set
them up straight.
It's one of those?
It's one of those things.
This past year, it's been
like a runaway stagecoach,
and when it's your life
and your life's direction
and your family, yeah,
you want to grab the reins back.
It's just going to
be money coming in.
Things are moving forward.
I know it's not over yet
by a long shot.
Tomorrow, start
the same thing over again,
which is trying to get
a piece of land.
♪♪
Narrator: In Montana, a mountain
lion on the prowl
has spooked a rancher's herd.
Now Rich is tracking 12 lost
head of cattle worth $30,000,
hoping to reach them
before nightfall.
Rich: This is big country,
you know?
There's a lot of river bottom
for miles and miles,
and so, mainly, I'm looking
for the tracks and manure
from the cattle
and having Sniper
go in the willows
and look around.
If he smells them cows,
he'll take after them.
Well, them cattle
have kind of gone
this way into these willows.
I don't know where
that lion is at.
I haven't seen any more signs.
She's probably laid up
right now.
She's waiting till it gets dark,
and then she'll start hunting.
So, hopefully, I can get
these heifers out of here
before it gets dark.
Come on.
It's getting late in the day,
so I don't have a lot of time.
I just got to keep riding
till I find them.
Yeah, they went this way.
Come on.
Come on, Roddy.
♪♪
[ Cow moos ]
Ooh, hold, Roddy.
Something's up there.
Come on.
Come on, Roddy.
Here.
Get up there.
Come on.
[ Clicks tongue ]
There they are.
Sniper, get ahold!
Let's go.
Narrator: The cattle are
10 miles out from the ranch.
They'll need to be rounded up
and driven home,
a job that Rich's herding dog,
Sniper, is born to do.
Rich: Come on.
You want to keep them together
in a tighter your circle
where you can control them.
Narrator: Sniper works point,
cutting the loose cattle
into a decreasing circle
that Rich can steer
on horseback.
Rich: Wherever you put pressure,
they're going to go
the opposite way,
so I send Sniper out.
Get ahold.
Back!
As soon as I see the cows
moving the direction I want,
I back him off.
Get ahold.
Back.
He backs off.
I put pressure.
We're doing this back and forth
and keeping them moving ahead.
Got them cornered.
They're together, but they're
a little bit wound up.
Come on.
I'm going to head back
to the ranch now.
Going to take me a while.
I got a ways to go.
Narrator: Four thousand feet up
on the icy peaks
of Alaska's Kodiak Island,
Marty is stalking
a pair of mountain goats.
Just one will provide
enough meat to feed his family
for a month.
But with only 2 hours
of daylight left,
he needs to make a kill now
or start his long
descent empty-handed.
Marty: I don't see them now,
and they could've left.
But it's getting pretty steep.
You know, you slip
and fall up there,
you could fall for a long ways.
I got to keep moving.
Narrator: At high altitudes,
the elements are relentless.
Strong winds and snow flurries
make the climb
even more dangerous.
And white mountain goats
are nearly impossible to spot.
Marty: The weather is turning.
It's really coming down.
Tempted to maybe just try
a little bit more.
I don't know.
This is my last chance,
so I'm really hoping
to get something.
♪♪
I don't think I can do it.
It's just too
straight up and down.
Going around looks
almost impossible.
It's --
Where they're at right now,
it's kind of hopeless.
Narrator: Marty needs to make
the dangerous descent
before nightfall,
and with his return flight
leaving first thing
in the morning,
he's forced to call off
the hunt altogether.
Marty: Well, live to fight
another day, I guess.
You always want to shoot
something when you go hunting,
but it's a goat hunt, you know?
It's the real deal.
They're all like this.
It's all super steep,
and it can be dangerous.
It's about all I can do here.
I'll just try and fill up
the freezer some other time.
♪♪
Narrator: In the Ruby Valley,
the cattle drive is closing in
on home
in the nick of time.
They're still a little
spooky from that lion,
being chased around.
Predators
are most active at night,
and Rich needs
these wayward cows
back in the safety
of their pen before sunset.
Rich: I'm almost there.
I got a misfire,
but they're pretty wound up.
Open that gate.
There's a big risk,
if these heifers would've been
out there through the night.
So I'm really glad I got this
job done before it got dark.
Get ahold!
Well, I think I got them, Reed.
All right.
Well, thanks, Rich.
-Oh, any time. Any time.
-Appreciate it.
I got some meat
for you here.
Narrator: Rescuing 30 grand
worth of cattle
comes with a reward --
250 pounds of prime beef.
It's Rich's biggest payday
after a lean winter.
Rich: My food situation this
winter has been really tough.
I've been trying to trap a few
rabbits here and there as I go.
Now I've got a bunch of meat,
so I'm going to
have steak tonight.
All right.
Thank you, man.
Appreciate it.
That should hold me
for a while.
I got the cattle all back
for the rancher,
but I know there's
a lot of work yet to be done.
With this female lion,
I'm not sure what she's doing
or what her plans are.
That's the way the season's
been, been a long hard fight,
and it's not over.
Narrator: Next time,
on "Mountain Men"...
as the meltdown accelerates...
Sure looks like a bear.
Narrator: ...Morgan braces
for a new danger...
Morgan: I need to get this place
cleaned up for springtime
and more bear-secure.
Narrator: ...Rich fights to stay
in the game...
Rich: I don't know what's going
on yet with this lion,
but the ranchers
are depending on me
to take care of the problem.
Narrator: ...but falls behind.
Oh. What the heck?
Got some smoke
coming out of there.
Narrator: And Eustace's race
to the finish...
Eustace: I told Gary
at Boone Custom
we'd get those boards
over to him today.
Narrator: ...ends in ruin.
-Preston!
-Oh, my God!
♪♪